okay president bush's pardon of casper
weinberger
and other iran-contra defendants
undermines the principle that no man is
above the law it demonstrates that
powerful people with powerful allies can
commit serious crimes in high office
deliberately abusing the public trust
without consequences
Weinberger faced four felony charges he
deserved to be tried by a jury of
citizens although it is the president's
prerogative to grant pardons it is every
American's right that the criminal
justice system be administered fairly
regardless of a person's rank and
connections the iran-contra cover-up has
continued for more than six years it has
now been completed with the pardon of
caspar weinberger we will make a full
report on our findings to Congress and
the public describing the details and
extent of this cover-up Weinberger's
early and deliberate decision to conceal
and withhold extensive contemporaneous
notes of the iran-contra matter
radically altered the official
investigations and possibly forestall
timely impeachment proceedings against
President Reagan and other officials
Weinberger's notes contain evidence of a
conspiracy among the highest-ranking
Reagan administration officials to lie
to Congress and the American public
because these notes were withheld from
investigators for years many of the
leads were impossible to follow key
witnesses had purportedly forgotten what
was said and done and statutes of
limitations had expired
Weinberger's concealment of notes is a
part of a disturbing pattern of
deception of and obstruction that
permeated the highest levels of the
Reagan and Bush administration's the
office was informed my office was
informed only within the past two weeks
on December 11th 1992 that President
Bush had failed produced to
investigators his own highly relevant
contemporaneous notes despite repeated
requests for such documents the
production of these notes is still
ongoing and will lead to appropriate
action some would have to be a furnish
to
Weinberger they could have led to
President Bush being called as a witness
in that case in light of President
Bush's own misconduct we are gravely
concerned by his decision to pardon
others
he lied to Congress and obstructed
official investigations I'm not going to
get into a further discussion of those
facts now the although the investigation
has been seriously damaged by President
Bush's action today it is not over and
so therefore I will not comment on
the the for all practical purposes I
think it does seriously damage it there
are theoretical ways in which we could
proceed by further interrogation grants
of immunity and things like that but for
all practical purposes I think this is a
very very damaging the well we have
still to complete the work on President
Bush's own records that we've just were
just receiving we will have to make a
final reevaluation of our position as to
persons who have been pardoned and then
of course our biggest job from now on
will be the completion of the final
report the timing of that report had
been planned for mid spring because of
the schedule of our cases the Weinberger
case was scheduled to begin on January
5th and the Claridge case was scheduled
to begin on March 15th and so the report
could not have been filed if those cases
were tried before probably the end of
April or early May we all now have to
see whether we can change that that
schedule and realign our resources
appropriately
I don't want to make that statement yet
that's it seriously impairs that
possibility but I until we have fully
evaluated the facts which we have
developed and considered what
appropriate steps should be taken in
view of the partners I can't make that
statement yet no it wasn't a wasted
effort because what it has done first of
all it there were fourteen indictments
eleven of which resulted in convictions
two of which were awaiting trial and one
of which was dismissed because the
administration the bush administration
would not release publicly known
but classified information so there were
these these each of these cases was
tried to a district judge and to a jury
the charges were found legally
sufficient and the juries found the
every person who went to trial was found
guilty of a felony or multiple felonies
and there has never been any question as
to the sufficiency of the evidence to
support these convictions they the
reversals which occurred in the North
and Poindexter case were because
Congress granted immunity to them and
the court felt that even though we take
an extensive efforts to insulate
ourselves from the immune eyes dinh firm
ation that nevertheless the exposure of
third party witnesses required a
reversal so I think that the
demonstration that person's committing
these acts can be brought to justice and
can be convicted before jurors and the
careful and intelligent display of of
concern that each jury has
manifested in reaching these decisions
there were no snap decisions by jurors
they were carefully thought obviously I
think is a very encouraging sign for the
administration of justice and that it
made me to me it means that the careful
work and the lengthy work that we have
done to bring these cases to trial were
truly worthwhile further it was the
constant exposure and the threat of
exposure in the Weinberger case itself
that brought on this sudden concern for
a pardon
you know you might ask if a person is
going to be pardoned why wait six years
or if a person is indicted in June or
July why wait until after the election
before pardoning him these are questions
which would occur I think to to to most
people and so I think the exposure of
the entire process including these
pardons is a worthwhile development for
for the public's understanding of its
government of how government should be
conducted and how it was conducted under
the Reagan and Bush administration's
that's what Weinberger said well he's a
biased the person a biased observer one
might say and and the fact is that when
he was confronted that that as this
trial approached the intensified efforts
to pave the road to pardon by by mr.
Weinberger's counsel and by public
figures who were friendly to him has
shown that he did not regard this as in
the least bit frivolous or as in the
least bit unlikely to lead to a
conviction
I'm sure it's troubling to President
Bush and I'm sure it was troubling to
President Reagan but the quite the thing
is that unless you're going to accept
the premise that a public officer can
lie to Congress when Congress is
proceeding by its committees these are
not stray corredor conversations these
are these are inquiries posed by a
congressional committee challenging the
policy of the president and the
president is concealing conduct which he
knows is in violation of congressional
policy and the just to say that that's
simply a political difference a lie to
Congress is not a matter of political
opinion that is a crime and they a
person going before a congressional
committee has three options he can tell
the truth he can tell the he can refuse
to answer claim executive privilege and
then that brings down the wrath of
Congress of course or he can lie now the
third option is criminal that is not
political
yeah I am I was because it waited right
up until the eve of the trial the trial
is scheduled for January 5th I would
think that if it was going to be a
pardon
that the pardon would have come earlier
rather particular ly when we are all
concerned with the time that my
investigation has taken and with its
expense why prolong it if they're going
to Park so it it's a it's a funny
development and that said the timing I
think is is unusual - wait what - wait
while everyone else went through their
trial and were found guilty and then - -
pardon this person as he's about to
start his trial no a pardon is always a
possibility but I really didn't think
the pardon power would be used in a case
where it could be so easily recognized
as a cover-up
motivation for this part I I don't want
to speculate on that he said that more
than once and that is that is a false
statement and there was never any such
such propose that he was he was invited
to tell the truth as to what he knew no
one has ever suggested that he give
false testimony or that he testify
against any particular person that would
be not only would it be improper it
would have been foolhardy for a
prosecutor to do that that that's the
last thing he wants is somebody giving
false testimony in an investigation like
this where you've taken so long to
develop truthful testimony well we're
going to have to evaluate our situation
in the light of this
it certainly has reduced the the the
likelihood of further prosecutions but I
say we want to examine every possibility
before we reach that final conclusion
well I I don't think it's proper for me
to to name those names I'll leave that
to you to know I have a law firm it's
been keeping my office for me for a long
time so I'll come back and go to work
for them but we first are not finished
and I don't want to make any decisions
or any moves until we have carefully
gone over the options available to us
and then gut in our report out that get
reporting on this activity is a far more
comprehensive and difficult job than you
might might think and in the end I hope
our report is reduced to a an
appropriate size but to get there it
means writing up a whole lot of
of prior activities that have to be at
least considered for inclusion in the
report they will reach varying
conclusions and I think we have to wait
and see what the report looks like
before we get to that but that point one
of the things that we're going to have
to consider or one of the things that
Congress is going to have to consider
next year is what to do about the
renewal of the Independent Counsel Act
and our experience good and bad is going
to be something that they will want to
consider and I in what is likely to be a
reenactment of that act with additional
perhaps procedural restraints on no no
not in the least
the public the American public is a very
discerning and perceptive group it will
reach its own conclusion as to outrage I
think that political figures again and
again this light miss miss evaluate and
under evaluate its its strength the
strength of our of our public and the
public will reach its conclusion they
can see through things just as fast as
but much faster than most people
I hope I can't say now we're going to
have to regroup we had been thinking in
May whether we can do it earlier I will
have to see that depends on the
president you work for I don't think so
that's a constitutional power it would
take a constitutional amendment to
change it and I don't think it should be
changed I think the power of a pardon
it's a very ancient power that goes goes
back before the founding of this country
it was it was a in early English times
laws were harsh and a trivial crime
could could expose you to very severe
penalties including death and it was the
pardon power of the king that
ameliorated those harsh laws and that
people looked to particularly when when
judicial proceedings aren't weren't very
good when they were trial by ordeal or
trial by battle and the outcome was
pretty bad that pardons were necessary
so I think I think the pardon power
should be continued and I don't think it
should be restricted it's a matter it's
a matter for the conscience of the
president and the judgment of the
President as as reviewed by the public
after that judgment is exercised excuse
me the only time well one of the one of
the biggest problems with the office is
that it literally takes a person like me
out of private practice and puts and
brings them to Washington without
anything without a yellow pad without a
pencil and says investigate three major
departments the State Department the CIA
and Defense Department the White House
and the National Security Council and
you don't have a you don't even have a
place the chief judge is kind enough to
give
you an empty set of judicial chambers
and to go set up in you know it would be
very valuable to future independent
counsel if there could be some kind of a
cadre of administrative experts or just
an administrative group that he could
look to to help him get started and to
carry him forward the second thing would
be some kind of facility we we did not
choose the place that we established our
office and that was picked for us by the
General Services Administration and it
had to get the approval of all of the
intelligence agencies who let us have
their records so they insisted on this
very high rent place that we've had to
use if there were a decent secure
facility anywhere in any loft building
that would be far that would be fine but
the thing is that if 40% of our expenses
have been for administrative matters
this or using a rough figure now that
that that could be saved by just a place
to hang your hat in a government
building and and a group of people who
would be able to get your office going
and keep track of your records and your
expenses and do all the things that a
that a law office has to do that and I
think that may be something that the the
Congress will look at for the next
independent council Act
with some of the wife you've seen is
there a possibility that you go after
hitting someone I don't I don't want to
speculate on that it's over through
well I thank you very much and I
appreciate your coming down here on
Christmas Eve and I didn't plan the
timing of this